He understood what the mission of Student Affairs
was all about and was able to put most of that in
practice while he was here. Because when he was, he
really started the Division of Student Affairs,
or Student Services back then it was called, at
Texas A&M University. And he still refers to a
paper that he wrote at Christmas time in 1973 about
what his goals were for the division. And over
time, he put almost every one of them in place. Now,
he came here only a few months before you did,
didn't he? He was here about two or three months
before I was. That's right. Okay. What he put into
place, well, in the long run, recreational
sportsmen made it to student affairs. That took a
few years. But he started the personal counseling
center, which is now called the student
counseling center. That didn't exist at that
time. He brought it in. the health center over to
him. At one time the police were in student
affairs. Student financial aid he brought into
student affairs. There's a lot of things that he
wrote about in that paper that happened over the
next 10 years. By 83 most of those things are in
place. And then describe McCandless
personality. Charles McCandless was energetic,
bright, always had a smile on his face. He's the
best customer, one of the best. We have several
long-term customers. But he started playing
handball and racquetball with Buck Henderson.
Buck was a student and Charles was the director of
intramurals. And I'm not sure what year that was,
but it was probably in the early 60s. Well, they
still play three times a week. Charles, this was
after Charles left here to be the vice president of
Iowa State, retired, came back, became a member
again, and now they're playing again, but great
customer, great friend, and very bright. You
know, he's always fun to be around because he's
always got a good story.
In those early years, did you run into any
obstacles as intramurals was growing? No, it was
interesting because we were growing so fast. We
were growing by almost 100. About four years in a
row, our major team sports were growing from 100 to
200, 300 to 400 teams. It was expanding that
rapidly. What happened to us is we would run out of
money in April or May. And what I had to do is write a
letter to Dr. Coles and say, this is what we
budgeted for, this is what we've experienced. We
were out of money, can you help us? And he was able to
help us. No, there really were no major obstacles.
The people we worked with, from Dr. Lamas to Dr.
Coles, the presidents that were in place, were
always very supportive. In that time, we built the
original Penberthy Fields here, and then we built
another set of fields that are now called
Penberthy Intramural Sports Center. We built the
Reed Building. And that was primarily Carl
Landis' project and then we built this village. So
we haven't had a lack of support. In those years
when there was rapid growth, the expenses were for
what, referees? Primarily for referees. Where
did you get those officials? Same place we get them
now. We advertise. All of our officials are
students.
What we try to accomplish, and probably are as good
at this as anybody, is taking somebody who's never
officiated a game, and that's 75% of our people in
every sport, every year, never officiated
before, and put them through a training program
that gives them an opportunity to be successful at
officiating. That's one of the toughest jobs
there is. But that's our approach to it and that's
the way we've done that. We employ right now 1,100
different students a year. About 500 of those are
officials. Now what was the compensation for them
in the early years and what is it now? Now they're
starting at about $5.25 an hour. Back then, the
minimum wage, you may have to help me with this, the
minimum wage was probably $2 or $2.50 an hour,
somewhere there. So it's normally been minimum
wage? Right now, they're just a little bit above
minimum wage. But for most of the years I've been
here, officials have been paid minimum wage.
Describe the shift that must have occurred as
intramurals went from being predominantly core
to, I presume, predominantly non-core. It was a
pretty smooth transition in reality. The student
body at the time I got here was predominantly
non-reported. There was probably 2,000 in the
Corps and 16,000 in the Army. But back then, there
was some fairly sharp divides, as you can imagine.
And you had Corps non-reqs, is what they called
them. And we did some scheduling that... that
helped them really compete against each other in a
more pleasant way. And I think in time it became
Aggies, you know, the one competition with Aggies
as opposed to Corps versus none or any kind of deal.
But the transition really went pretty smooth.
Were there ever any incidents that you remember in
the Corps, non-Corps? There was some pretty
healthy competition, but really no incidents.
Our students here, when you put them in a
competitive situation, follow the rules. They
don't hassle the officials. It's one of the best
competitive situations you'll ever see. They're
good sports. Who did the training of the new
officials? That was me to begin with, and then I had
an assistant director my first year here, Jim
Peter, and he took that job over, and then John
Meyer, who's now in Colorado. But it's always
been, as I always say, We've had anywhere from one
to four people in our intramural program. And
their primary job is training. They have to be good
teachers. They have to know their sports. They
have to know the rules. But the primary thing is
they have to know how to teach, because they're
teaching people a job skill. Which would be, were
the easiest and the most difficult officials to
locate?
Volleyball is the easiest. And we, in Texas, have a
good supply of women playing volleyball in high
school. They understand the sport very well. And
they're willing to officiate. And softball is
fairly easy to officiate, too. The ones that are
most difficult is basketball. I mean, it's the
hardest sport to officiate. Even though there's a
lot of people playing it, there's not many people
that really want to call off any. And everybody's
so close together in that game. Football is tough
because everybody thinks they know football
until they try to officiate it, and then they
realize how little they know about the game. Rules
in football are a little more difficult than they
are in the other sports, and they're more
difficult to enforce. Right. In those early
years, as you looked at what we were doing and not
doing, are there any that you thought that we
should have been doing that we were not? Are you
surprised we weren't? I was a little concerned
when I first got here that the way we were
supervising recreation, drop-in recreation,
and the way we were securing facilities and
managing facilities for the safety of the
participants. That was one of the
recommendations I made to Dr. Landis.
And that's really what he was looking for, because
from somebody who had been involved in physical
education and not necessarily managing
facilities, that's kind of what he was looking
for, somebody to say, we really need to do this.
Any sports that you added? we've had just about
every sport that you can imagine here. That's the
thing that's fun about it. It's creative. You go to
conferences, you find new sports, you introduce
them here, and they work. Some examples. Well,
flickerball is an Aggie sport. You won't see that
anyplace else. Flicker? Is that one word or two?
Two words. Actually, it's one word, flickerball.
And that's a football passing game. But after you
catch the ball, you have to stop. You can't run with
the ball. So it's a football passing game, and it's
a combination of football skills and basketball
skills. Pass the ball, catch the ball, and you end
up throwing it through a target, a goal. A board
that looks like a basketball backboard, but it's
got a hole in the center of it. It goes through, you
score three points. If you hit the ball, you score
one point. So it has soccer kind of skills,
basketball kind of skills, and football skills.
Is it a round ball or a, oh it's a football, okay.
You're throwing a football. And that's an Aggie
game. That one's been most popular for many years.
It's pretty well died out now. It's, the primary
reason it's died out is it's a really difficult
game to officiate. You can't find anybody to
officiate if they want to. Inner tube water
sports, that was pretty interesting. Inner tube
water polo and inner tube water basketball. It
took a game that's really tough to play, put people
in inner tubes and they have a lot of fun with it. So
that was a pretty good one. Pickleball is a game
played with a wooden paddle and a wiffle ball over a
badminton net that's on a badminton court, but the
badminton net is lowered down to like a tennis net.
It's called pickleball. some really strange.
Look and see if there's any others that I can't
think of right off the top of my head.
One of the things we're doing now is fantasy
football. So it's not it's not an active sport. But
it's, it's very much sports related fantasy
footballs. indoor soccer. That, gosh, last year
we had 197 teams in indoor soccer. Played on a
basketball arena? Yeah. When you look at it into
our facility area, our indoor soccer court is
about 208 feet long and about 85 feet wide. But it's
got boards like an ice arena. But when you got here
from the University of Texas, as you looked at the
array of things we were doing, are there some that
we were not, that you were a little surprised we
weren't doing? No, it was a fairly broad program.
You know, I think the main thing that we added was
women's leagues and co-ed leagues. And then a few
years later we added the skill levels. And that
really made a big difference. The things that we
didn't really have a handle on was facility
supervision for free play, sports clubs, There
really was no organizational structure for
sports clubs and that's something I started about
two years after I got here and got funding through
Dr. Cole to support. Outdoor
recreation was being managed by a committee at the
Student Center and in time that came over to us. But
that one, we had to play the politics right, so we
didn't take it away from them. They ended up
saying, here it is. But we went from an intramural
program to a comprehensive recreational sports
program. And part of that was, when I got here, I
knew two things. Sports clubs and facility
management, we had to do. And that's from my
experience in Texas. And then over the years of
going to participating in our national
associations. You know, you pick up on things that
you could be, should be doing. Now, the athletic
director on paper when you arrived, I guess, was
Emory Ballard. Correct. In fact, who in the
athletic department did you work with most?
Marvin Tate. Marvin, who was at that time
associate, I believe. Right. And was that
pleasant, easy? Yeah. Marvin was good to work
with.
Of course, he later became Mayor Bryan. He was a
good politician. He took care of himself first,
his programs first, but he was not unwilling to
help us whenever we needed help. We started one of
the first, we call it varsity level two programs in
the country, where we elevated water polo into a
varsity status without scholarship. It was kind
of a division three. model program within a
Division I program. It's kind of unusual. We did
that with soccer and with, so we did some creative
things with Marvin. He was willing to work with us.
All right. Then he became athletic director, in
fact, in about 77 or 8. So did you continue to work
with him or was there a subordinate? We probably
started working with Walter Groff more after
Marvin became the director. All right. And then
did, as the football, head football coach
changed, did that cause any trouble, any change
for you all? Not really because the two, you know,
the people that have been here for most of the time
I've been here, Billy Picker is the facility
manager for the athletic department, and Wally
Groff has been there the whole time. And we still
communicate with those two people most of the
time. Describe some of the realities of the
expansion of the women's involvement in
intramurals. There must have been some unique
experiences occasionally.
Well, that's a pretty good question. Okay. They
explode in numbers, I presume, don't they? Yeah,
the numbers grew pretty rapidly. I guess the one
thing that was kind of exciting was at that time,
Title IX was just coming out. 1973 or so, I think,
was the year of Title IX. And we were dealing with it
because we had in 74 or 75 because we started a
sports club program and Kay Don, who was in
physical education at the time, had kind of done a
women's sports organization of some kind. She
came in with us with a sports club organization
that we put together. So Kay and I worked together
for two or three years heading women towards some
kind of a varsity setting. I'm not sure we knew we
were doing that, but all of a sudden it happened and
we had a women's varsity program and she was the
athletic director for women at that time. And that
was kind of fun to kind of start that and watch it
develop and then really see it come to full
fruition with a women's varsity program. So from
the varsity side, that was pretty exciting stuff.
It was just fun to...
The other schools had the men's program and the
women's program. It was just fun to see here how
sport developed and it wasn't so much men, women.
It was more Aggies. The co-work program really was
much bigger than the women's program. We had a lot
more women playing in the co-rec program, which is
good. It's a good socialization time. But the
women's program grew steadily and is very
positive. One of the things that I think is pretty
interesting kind of relates to your question,
though. It was pretty interesting in the 70s
especially to have, and this name John and I were
just talking about this weekend, Debbie Pistone.
probably the best official we've ever had. And
she's out there officiating in Class A men's
basketball in the mid-70s. Now that's pretty
exciting. Guys walk on the court, and they're the
top of their league in Class A men's basketball.
And this young woman comes on the court with a
whistle in her mouth. And she controls the game.
She runs the game. Afterwards, they understand
how good she is. Did any of them try to stare her
down? Oh yeah, there's always, the problem that
women face in officiating is intimidation
factor. And some of them doesn't bother at all.
Some good officials have trouble getting by that.
Have any idea where she is now? I don't. I don't.
We're going to look her up though. Interesting to
know where she went to. Did, no particular
incidents in women in the correct leagues? Now,
flag football was one of the major sports. What
would be the typical makeup of a team? Was there a
certain percentage of men and women that had to be
on the field? Yes. We played around with this a
little bit, but I think we ended up with six women
and six men on the team. And there could only be one,
we had rules like there could be only one
male-to-male pass in a four-down series. So it
forced you to pass to women or have women passing to
men. I used to play on the team. We always had a staff
team. It was really interesting because Tara
Shipley was her name. She's related to John Coldis
through Todd Shipley, who's his son-in-law.
Melissa and Todd Shipley. And he says, I have a
student who needs to work. This is one of his
Wednesday morning meetings. I have a student who
needs a job. She's transferring from the
University of Texas.
She just happened to have a job. She came over to
work. The reason she had transferred down here is
her fiance played football for the Aggies. Her
name was Ray Childress. She not only turned out to
be probably the best student worker we ever had.
She was sharp as a tack, energetic, creative, and
just a hard worker. But she was also one of the best
football players we had on our staff team. She'd
never played flag football before she got out
there. She had hands of glue. You threw it anywhere
closer, she could get it. But the Ray Childress, He
would come to every game and he would hold the downs
marker on the side. And in one game we were playing
in, she was playing on defense and the ball went in
the air and one of our guys, she was a pretty good
size guy, was running towards the ball and she was
in the way. He didn't see it because he was looking
at the ball. He just ran right over her and she hits
the ground, boom. and Ray is on the sideline, he
throws that thing down and comes chugging out, you
okay, you okay? And she was, she was fine. I don't
know how she came through it without big bruises,
but it was funny to see. He really was taking care of
her. Now, in flag football there is blocking. It's
non-contact blocking. Oh. And we instituted that
That was probably one of the tougher things we did
in the first couple years we were here. I think it
was the second year I was here I said we're gonna, we
did it in Texas. And I had, part of the study I did
when I first got into this field with Lynn Reading
and Iowa State was to compare injury rates,
contact blocking, non-contact blocking. And
that was a study we reported on out at Los Angeles
when I met the guys from Texas. And Texas used
non-contact. When I came down here we used full
contact. So the second year I instituted it. And
it's more like what you see in basketball, only you
can use a moving screen in football. You can't use a
moving screen in basketball. You'd call for it.
It's not like a moving screen. You try to position
yourself between, and the person rushing the
passer has to go around as opposed to through you.
So it's a non-contact. And that was one of the
things that allowed more people to enjoy
football. Football was one of our, almost a minor
sport until we instituted that. It grew with
everything else because women could play without
fear of getting in their face. smashed and guys
good too first when I was at Iowa State the year
before I went to Texas I played on a staff team there
and after the first game two guys had to go get their
teeth now the flag the flag that is grabbed by the
opponent is placed where now the ones we use have as
a flag there's a belt and it has Flag on each side and
one in the back. Oh, so one at each hip and one at the
back. And if you grab one of the... Flags and the
whole belt comes off. Okay. Okay. In terms of the
co-ed sports, which ones were the most popular
co-eds? Flag football and softball. And
softball. Slow-pitch softball. Slow-pitch,
which means the ball is pitched up and then down.
Big arc, big arc kind of. Any fast-pitch softball
at all? We probably had the biggest fast pitch
lease in the country. But I think the last time we
really offered it was 7879 and 734567 and along in
there we had Quite a bit of fast pitch. Men and women
or? Primarily men. Primarily men. Fast pitch for
women really didn't get started until after,
really after my daughter had graduated. That's
new to me too. Yeah, that's about 87. Have there
been any examples of an intramural participant
going on to varsity sports? There are and I wish I
could remember the name right now. We had a A kid who
played basketball in Emeralds and Shelby
actually picked him up way back then.
I think that's the only one that I can think of. I
think we had one in Texas too when I was there. Which
coaches, varsity coaches, were the most helpful
to y'all in whatever sports? For the most part, we
dealt with Billy Pickard on facilities, because
he had some hand in managing all the facilities.
You know, Edward Millard was a good guy to work
with. He really was.
And R.C. was really good to work with in football.
Mark Johnson. We use this facility every year.
Just a gentleman of the guy. I don't think we've all
been there.
We've enjoyed a good relationship with all the
coaches. I can't think of any specific incidents
that's been a problem. All right, let's go then
from the 70s, move forward. Describe how things
changed. were modified. Well, the basic change
was going from strictly an intramural program,
which was designed to provide competition,
on-campus competition for Aggies. And we grew
that just about as big as it could grow. We were
filling every space we had with sports
activities. And what that created was a lack of
opportunity for people to drop in and shoot hoops
or play racquetball or whatever. We had classes
that went essentially from eight to five in all the
facilities we had. And we had intramurals that
went from five to midnight. And there was two or
three or four years that we were going until 2 a.m.
with our building being open. And we were playing
intramurals until 2 a.m. on a regular basis. We
were just so packed with stuff. So our focus became
one of trying to figure a way to create facilities.
And we had built a lot of physical activity
facilities that were primarily designed for
physical education. And we started talking to the
student body about building a recreation center
similar to one that was built at Texas Tech in 1980,
one that was built at Purdue in 1957, was probably
the first one. But that whole genre of buildings
started evolving and really evolving and we think
you know we've got the jam in the country right now
this particular facility but we started talking
to their students about that and in 1987 let's do it
they said let's do it now and that's when we had the
vote the original referendum that said we're
going to charge ourselves 50 to build this
building all right and during during these years
of transition and change
which sports which activities compared to
capability to handle which were the most over
popular and the least compare the extremes
well most popular intramural sport was the sports
ebb and flow in popularity was softball. Slow
pitch softball went from being
in the mid 70s, probably 200 teams. We were right at
120 teams in 74. In 1979, we had 810 teams enter the
tournament. We didn't have a single lighted field
on campus. So we were trying to figure out how to do
that. But we did have about 25 fields at that time.
We put backstops up any place you could find bloody
grass, we had a backstop up. So that was really
popular. In tennis, we went to about 1,200
different participants in a tennis tournament at
one time. Now it's down to around 200. So the sports
kind of ebb and flow. popularity but I think the
main thing that happened though is we kept saying
that there there was a need for facility where
people could come and play at their leisure
participate at their leisure on their schedule
not on our schedule and the thing that happened has
the one in 1994-95
our head count of people using our program was
250,000 in 1995-96 when we opened this building it
was 1,250,000 just in this building. So we know
that there was a need for people to have a place to go
recreate, and this building filled that need.
That was probably the massive change. The other
thing that happened with this building that we had
intramurals, which was our biggest program, and
we were reaching 48% of the student body in
intramurals. Intramurals is primarily focused
in men. Probably 90% of the participants in
intramurals are men. Now when? Men. Now? Now. Then
and now. Oh. It's always been that way. Okay. What
happened when we opened this building is we were
able to accommodate activities that women enjoy
participating in. And if you look now, instead of
our participants being 90% men 10% women it's 52%
men 48% women so it's almost exactly the same as the
enrollment it is if you look at it it's going to be
exactly the same because we're reaching 70 to 75
percent of the student body every semester so
we're not going to vary from